hey everyone my name is Jimmy I'm a
former LinkedIn software engineer who
has spent the last three years helping
others prepare for the coding interview
in this video I'm going to be talking
about depth for search and recursion
we're going to learn how to use depth
for search and recursion to solve
questions related to Binary trees now
when it comes to the coding interview
depth for search and recursion are
arguably the two most important topics
out there and that's because they're
very versatile aside from binary trees
they can also be used to solve questions
involving graphs backtracking and
dynamic programming so this video is
intended for anyone who's maybe just
starting out in their studying Journey
or for those who are comfortable
tackling questions in that easy to
medium range but really just want to
build a strong foundation so that they
have more confidence solving problems
moving forward so we're going to first
touch on how to use depth first search
to to Traverse the nodes in a binary
tree but the main focus of this video
will be about recursion and how to use
recursion to solve binary tree questions
so so we'll learn about the relationship
between death for search and recursion
we'll learn about how to think
recursively when solving binary tree
problems and finally we'll learn how to
take that thinking and translate that
into a working recursive implementation
so there is a text version of this
material at the hello interview website
I'm going to leave all links in the
description below there you'll find free
interactive visual guides to the most
important coding interview patterns and
more importantly I'll leave a couple of
links to practice problems that you can
try try for yourself to apply what you
learned in this video lastly before we
get started please don't hesitate to
like comment and subscribe especially if
you want to see more of this material in
the future all right so let's get
started depth first search is an
algorithm for visiting every node in a
tree or graph like data structure it
does so in a very specific fashion which
is what we're going to visualize now so
depth for search is going to start at
the root node of our binary tree
then it's going to visit nodes by going
down and to the left until we reach a
leaf node which is a dead end now at
this Leaf node since we can't go down
any further what we're going to do is
we're going to backtrack back up to the
previous node so this backtracking is a
key part of the depth first search
algorithm and it ensures that we can
visit every node in our binary tree but
I also want to point out another fact is
that when we backtrack away from a node
in our binary tree we've actually
explored all of the nodes in the sub
tree rooted at that node so we've
explored all of the nodes at the subtree
rooted at one when we backtracked away
from it and went back to Noe two and
this fact plays a key role when we solve
questions using recursion as we're going
to see in a little bit but from now we
can continue the depth for search
process so at node two we're going to
now visit node 3 node three we reached a
dead end so we're going to backtrack
back up to node two at node two we
finished visiting both of its left and
right children children so we're going
to backtrack back up to node 4 and
notice how after we've done that
backtracking we've finished visiting all
of the nodes in this left subtree which
I've just shown by putting those nodes
in dark blue so at node four we're just
going to now move on to the
right and here we' reached a leaf node
so we're going to backtrack backtrack
and when we finally reached node 4 again
which is our root we've now visited
every single node in our binary tree and
our depth for search Al has finished so
we can think of depth for search as a
form of iteration and we can use
iteration to solve a question like
finding the sum of the nodes in a binary
tree so what we'll do is we'll keep a
running counter right here sum and then
we'll use dep first search to iterate
over every single node in the binary
tree and when we reach a node we're
going to add that node's value to the
sum and when the depth first search
eventually finishes and visits every
single node we're going to have the sum
of our binary tree at the end so I'm
going to refer to this approach as the
pure DFS approach to finding the sum of
a binary tree it works perfectly fine
there's nothing wrong with it but now I
want to shift gears a little bit and
talk about the recursive approach to the
same question we'll dig into why and the
advantages of the recursive approach in
just a little bit but first we're going
to talk about the
how so to solve this question of finding
the sum of of the nodes in a binary tree
using recursion we're going to need a
different approach our approach is going
to look like this we're going to pick a
node in our binary tree let's just pick
the root node for now and we're going to
think in terms of this node's left and
right sub trees so here's the left sub
tree and here's the right sub tree if we
know the sum of the left sub tree 2 + 3
+ 1 which is 6 and we know the sum of
the right sub tree 7 + 5 which is 12
well we can use those two values we can
add them together plus the sum of our
own node which is four we can add them
all together to get 22 which is the sum
of this entire binary tree now the nice
thing about describing the sum of a tree
like this is that it can be applied to
any sub tree in our binary tree so if we
look at this left sub tree right here
we're going to pick this node two as the
root its left sub tree has some one Its
Right sub tree has some three now 1 + 3
+ 2 is going to give us six which then
in turn can be used to find the sum of
the entire sub tree like we just saw
same thing with this sub tree right here
its left sub tree has sum zero right sub
tree has sum five 5 + 7 + 0 is going to
give us 12 which again is part of the
sum of the entire sub tree so if I were
to write an equation to describe what we
just saw it would look something like
this sum of a node equal to sum of its
letter left sub tree plus the sum of its
right sub tree plus the value of its
node sum node just represents the sum of
any sub tree rooted at a particular node
equal to the sum of its left sub tree
plus the sum of its right sub tree plus
the value of its node itself so the one
thing we do have to be careful of when
we're using this equation is that for an
empty sub tree like the one right here
this actually won't apply this is
because an empty sub tree has no left
and right subt trees so we can't
actually use this equation to find its
sum an empty sub tree is the base case
for our recursion meaning we can
calculat its sum directly and this is
because we know that an empty sub tree
has a sum of zero because it has no
nodes so these two equations can be used
to find the sum of any sub Tree in a
binary tree so now let's actually
visualize how the recursive solution to
this problem Works in code this is also
going to allow us to make the connection
between our recursive solution and the
depth for search process that we covered
in the beginning of this video so on our
left here we have the recursive solution
to our problem let's just take a moment
to understand what this function
represents We have tree suum takes in a
value node and what it's going to return
is the sum of the sub tree rooted at the
given node okay and it's going to do
that recursively the first two lines
represent the base case the sum of an
empty sub tree is zero while these three
lines represent the recursive way of
finding it in terms of its left and
right sub trees so now we're going to
visualize each step of how this
recursive function works so initially
it's called with node 4 and when this
function eventually returns it's going
to return with 22 as the sum of this
entire tree right here so the first step
of this function is to say okay in order
to find the sum of my tree I need to
first know the sum of my left sub tree
so we're going to do that by going in
and making a recursive call to tree Su
on . left so when we make that recursive
call what we're doing is we're taking a
copy of the recursive function and we're
pushing it onto the call stack which is
shown right here so it's important to
note that when this function eventually
returns it's going to return with the
sum of this sub tree which is six so in
order to find the sum of this sub tree
we need to follow that same process we
need to First find the sum of the left
sub tree so we're going to do that by
making a recursive call now node is
equal to one in this case and if you
notice this is just the DFS process that
we were talked about in the very
beginning of this video so here okay
node one needs the sum of its left sub
tree just going to make a recursive call
to find that and here we've reached our
first base case so now not is none so
this is going to hit this base case
right here so we can return zero
directly it's really important to
understand where this return value goes
and what it represents so we're going to
return zero now this value gets returned
to the uh node one as the sum of node
one's left subtree so we have that value
right here and this was just the
backtracking portion of DFS so now node
one has this value of zero for its left
sub tree so it's going to say okay let
me go find the sum of my right sub tree
just going to do that by making a
recursive call no is none here so we can
return zero directly okay at this point
node one has a sum of both of its left
and right subt trees so we going to take
those two values add it to its own value
and return it back to node two okay so 0
+ 0 + 1 the sum of this sub tree is 1
now node two receives that value as a
sum of its left sub tree and now it's
going to go on and make a recursive call
to find the sum of its right sub tree
okay this just looks a lot like what we
just covered hitting the base
case hitting the base case okay so now
node three has the sum of its left and
right sub trees which is zero it's going
to take Z +0 add it to
three okay so now that three gets
returned in the backtracking step to
node two node two now has the sum of its
left and right sub trees one and three
so it's going to take one and three add
it to its own value and return that back
up to its parent which is node four so
remember how I said when DFS backtracks
away from a node it means we finished
visiting all of the nodes in the sub
tree rooted at that node and so here's
just a a perfect place to visualize how
that is important for the recursive
solution at this point we've backtracked
away from node two which means we
finished visiting all of the nodes in
this subtree which also means we have
the sum of that subtree so that sum is
the value that we backtrack with back up
to Route node 4 while the rest of the
animation plays out let's just recap the
connection between DFS and recursion so
we use recursion to describe the sum of
a binary tree in terms of its left and
right subt trees and DFS just controls
the order in which we visit those subt
trees to supply the relevant sums and
before we move on let's just talk about
the time and space complexity of this
function the time complexity is going to
be o of n where n is the number of nodes
in our binary tree and that's because we
visit every single node once and in each
node we're doing a constant amount of
work now when we talk about the space
complexity this visual is actually going
to help us understand that as well the
space complex city is O of H where H is
the height of the binary tree and if we
want to visualize what that looks like
we can go to right here in our functions
execution you'll notice that there are a
total of four calls on the call stack we
have to account for the space that each
of these calls takes on the call stack
and that just corresponds to the height
of this binary tree right here the four
nodes that we have starting from the
route down to this node right here so
now let's talk about why we want to use
recursion when solving binary tree
problems in general there are two
advantages for using recursion the first
is that it lets us solve a specific type
of problem much more naturally and
easier than other approaches we're going
to cover what those problems are in the
next video so don't forget to subscribe
if you don't want to miss out on that
but the second reason is really for ease
of implementation on the left we have
the recursive approach to our treesome
problem and on our right we have two
different versions of the pure DFS uh
approach to the treesome problem that we
talked about in the beginning in either
case the recursive version is just much
fewer lines of code in this version
we're using recursion to implement DFS
but we have to introduce a global
variable to repeatedly add to it in each
call in this version we're using an
iterative version of DFS it's going to
be beyond the scope of the video so I
don't want to get too much into it but
this avoids having to use that Global
variable but we are writing a lot more
lines of code and so aside from this
brevity once we' figured out how to
think recursively about a binary tree
problem there's a very very
straightforward process that we can take
to go from that recursive way of
thinking about solving the problem to
the actual implementation we're going to
cover that
next so what we're going to do now is
we're going to write a recursive
solution to counting the number of nodes
in a binary tree and we're going to do
that by following the five steps that we
laid out here which is going to start
with how to think about the problem
recursively then how to take that
thinking and turn that into a working
recursive solution so let's just look at
this binary tree right here so we're
thinking recursively what I like to do
is I like to pick a note in the tree and
then ask myself okay what do I need from
my left and right sub trees in order to
solve my problem remember I'm trying to
count the number of nodes in this tree
okay so if I know that there are three
nodes in my left sub tree 1 2 3 and I
know that there are two nodes in my
right sub tree well I can just take
those two values and add one for my node
to get 1 + 2 + three for a total of
six each function call is going to
return the number of nodes in the
subtree rooted at the given node so it
returns number of nodes in the subtree
rooted at node and having this clear
definition of what each function call is
going to return is important because it
allows us to specify the base case
correctly which is step three so our
base case okay if each call returns a
number of nodes in the sub tree we did
node if node is empty so if not node
then we just want to return we want to
return zero because there are no nodes
in an empty sub tree okay so after
that's done we can actually move on to
making the recursive calls so this is
step four so I'm going to make recursive
calls to node.
left and no do
right and then I'm going to use those
values in the return statement based on
the way that we broke things down in
step one so we can return left plus
right + 1 one now I just want to use the
same process to show how to write a
recursive solution to a slightly more
complicated
question in this question I'm writing a
recursive solution to check if a Target
exists within a given binary tree so if
I have this binary Tre right here and my
target is two then that's going to
return true because two is right here
but if I was searching for the Target
eight I would return false so again just
going to use these five steps to go from
the way that I think about this problem
recursively to the actual implementation
okay so first step is to think
recursively again I'm going to pick a
node then ask myself what do I need from
my left and right subt trees in order to
solve my problem well for this problem
I'm going to need to know if the target
exists in my left or right sub trees
because if either of those things are
true then that means the target exists
in my entire binary tree right if two
exists
in this left sub tree that means two
exists in this entire tree so once I've
made that observation I can clearly
Define what each function is going to
return so I'm just going to write that
here returns if the target exists in the
sub tree rooted at the given node again
having a clear definition is really
going to help keep my base case correct
my base case I'm thinking empty tree so
if node is none I'm going to return
false because a Target cannot exist in a
empty tree but based So based on this
definition we also need some more
information that we can't just get
through the recursive calls so let's say
we're searching for the Target four in
this tree and we're at this node well
four doesn't exist in our left sub tree
four doesn't exist in our right sub tree
so those recursive calls would return
false but our node is actually equal to
the Target so we also need to check if
our node is equal to the Target then we
can just return true right away so I'm
going to do that now in the
code and where this statement lies in
relation to the recursive calls is
really important and we're going to see
why in the next section for now I'm just
going to finish writing this function so
if I know that my node doesn't equal the
Target that means I need to check my
left and right sub trees so I can move
on to step four and five making the
recursive calls and using them in the
return statement and for this particular
question we can actually just combine
them together in the return statement
for something like this so we can return
if the search Target exists in the left
sube or the search Target exists in the
right sub
tree so the last thing I want to do is
just visualize how this function works
for a few different cases when our
Target exists within the binary tree and
the reason for this is I'm just going to
show something called early return so
here I've just written the same logic as
we had before in just a slightly
different way that makes it easier to
tell exactly what is returning true okay
so for the first example let's just look
at the most trivial one when we're
searching for this target four and it
exists at the root of our binary tree so
in this case node. Val is going to equal
to our Target and we can just return
true right away without having to make
any recursive calls at all let's look at
a slightly more interesting example
which is when our Target exists in our
left sub tree when we're searching for
the Target
one okay so let's see what happens so
first thing to check no do vals equal to
Target that's not true so we need to go
search our left subtree so we're
searching our left sub Tree by making a
recursive call now node is equal to two
now we're searching for the Target
within this sub tree so again we're
going to make that recursive call
because 2 is not equal to four sorry two
is not equal to one so we're going to
make that recursive call to our left sub
tree so at this point we're searching
for if the target one exists with in
this sub tree right here so we're going
to see that node. Val is equal to Target
so we can just return true so this True
Value gets received by the parent of
node one which is node two and it just
indicates that hey that that Target one
exists somewhere in node twos left
subtree so this going to evaluate to
true so now we can return true directly
without having to explore any parts of
the right sub tree which is what this
code is doing so we're going to see
we're going to skip this this recursive
call and just return true
directly so we return true to our parent
so what we did is when we were right
there we basically said okay our Target
exists in my left sub tree so I don't
even need to check anything in my right
sub tree and you can imagine that if
there are a lot of nodes coming out here
in that right sub tree then this would
be a very useful optimization that we
could make now the root node originally
which is node four it received this
value as true so it can just return true
saying that we found one somewhere in
this binary tree so this is going to be
it for this video and we've covered a
lot we've covered the basics of depth
for search we've covered how to approach
using recursion to solve binary tree
problems and we've learned how to take
that recursive approach and translate
that directly into code we've also
visualized how recursive functions work
and how that they can do things such as
early returns and recursion is always
tricky for those who are just starting
with it because there's so much
happening behind the scenes but
hopefully this video helped spell
exactly what each of those steps are and
you'll just get more and more familiar
with them as you practice so the most
important thing after watching this
video is to make sure you tackle some
problems on your own I've left the links
to the relevant questions on hello
interview.com in the description below
each of these questions is going to have
detailed solutions that use a lot of
visuals and follow the same step-by-step
process that we talked about in this
video so by practice practicing doing
them you'll make sure you get the
repetition that you need to really
really understand these Concepts and if
you like this video be sure to subscribe
so you don't miss out on the next one in
which we further our understanding of
recursion when it comes to Binary trees
by talking about when to use helper
functions when to use Global variables
and the types of questions that are best
solved by using recursion okay so I hope
this helps everybody in their Journey
good luck on your interviews and I'll
see you next time